feat: update auth docs in preparation for v4 (#7229)
redwoodjs/redwood: docs/docs/authentication.md

# Authentication

Redwood has integrated auth end to end, from the web side to the api side.

> On the web side, the router can protect pages via the `Private` component, and even restrict access at the role-level.

Reviewer: Could you also mention the `private` prop on `<Set>` here? Mainly to save people from doing
```
<Private unauth...
  <Set wra...
```
or
```
<Set wra...
  <Private una...
```

Author: Sure, see https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/pull/7229/commits/ee1fbdced38696a63a2a933402631a28eacac78d

And if you'd prefer to work with the primitives, the `useAuth` hook exposes all the pieces to build the experience you want.

> Likewise, the api side is locked down by default: all SDLs are generated with the `@requireAuth` directive, making sure that making something publicly available is something that you opt into rather than out of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, the api side is locked down by default: all SDLs are generated with the `@requireAuth` directive, ensuring that making things publicly available is something that you opt into rather than out of.
```

I'm not super happy with my suggestion, but the goal was to get rid of the repeated use of "making" and "something".

Author: It sounds good to me

> You can also require auth anywhere in your Services, and even in your server-ful or -less functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also require auth anywhere in your Services, and even in your serverful or serverless functions.
```

What you had wasn't technically incorrect, but personally I think it reads better to just write both words out in this case

Last but not least, Redwood provides it's own auth provider: [dbAuth](./auth/dbauth.md).

In this doc, we'll cover auth in Redwood at a high level.
All auth providers share the same interface so the information here will be useful no matter which auth provider you use.

## Official integrations

> When you're ready to add auth to your app, there's a great list of providers to choose from, and if you don't see the one you like, you can integrate it via a simple API:

Reviewer: I don't know the correct English word for it, but in Swedish we'd say that this sentence has a misdirection. It's where a part of the sentence "points to"/"references" the wrong thing. (Please tell me if you know the correct English word for this.)

To fix it, you have to switch things around like this

```suggestion
Redwood has a simple API to integrate any auth provider you can think of. But to make it easier for you official integrations for some of the most popular auth providers are provided out of the box:
```

Author: I was confused what you meant at first but I looked at what's after the colon and get what you mean. And if there's a word for it I'm not sure what it is. A misdirection of some kind sounds right. Maybe misplacing the emphasis?

- [Auth0](./auth/auth0.md)
- [Azure Active Directory](./auth/azure.md)
- [Clerk](./auth/clerk.md)
- [Firebase](./auth/firebase.md)
- [Netlify](./auth/netlify.md)
- [Supabase](./auth/supabase.md)
- SuperTokens

:::tip how to tell if an integration is official

Look for the `@redwoodjs` scope to tell if an integration is official.
For example, Redwood's Auth0 integration comprises two npm packages: `@redwoodjs/auth-auth0-web` and `@redwoodjs/auth-auth0-api`.

:::

Other than bearing the `@redwoodjs` scope, the reason these providers are official is that we're committed to keeping them up to date.
You can set up any of them via the corresponding auth setup command:

```
yarn rw setup auth auth0
```

## The API at a high-level

We mentioned that Redwood has a simple API you can use to integrate any provider you want.
Let's dive into it here.

On the web side, there are two components that can be auth enabled: the `RedwoodApolloProvider` in `web/src/App.tsx` and the `Router` in `web/src/Routes.tsx`.

> Both take a `useAuth` prop. If provided, they'll use this hook to get information about the app's auth state. The `RedwoodApolloProvider` will use it to get a token to include in every GraphQL request, and the Router will use it to determine if a user has access a route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both take a `useAuth` prop. If provided, they'll use this hook to get information about the app's auth state. The `RedwoodApolloProvider` will use it to get a token to include in every GraphQL request, and the Router will use it to determine if a user has access to private or role-restricted routes
```

> When you set up an auth provider, the setup command makes a new file, `web/src/auth.ts`. This file's job is to make the `AuthProvider` and `useAuth` hook by integrating with the auth provider of your choice. Whenever you need access to the auth context, you'll import the `useAuth` hook from this file. The `RedwoodApolloProvider` and `Router` are no exception:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you set up an auth provider, the setup command makes a new file, `web/src/auth.ts`. This file's job is to create the `AuthProvider` and `useAuth` hook by integrating with the auth provider of your choice. Whenever you need access to the auth context, you'll import the `useAuth` hook from this file. The `RedwoodApolloProvider` and `Router` are no exceptions:
```

![web-side-auth](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32992335/208549951-469617d7-c798-4d9a-8a29-46efe23cca6a.png)

Once auth is setup on the web side, every GraphQL request includes a JWT.
The api side needs a way of verifying and decoding this token if it's to do anything with it.

> There's two steps to this process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two steps to this process:
```

- decoding the token
- mapping it into a user object

The `createGraphQLHandler` in `api/src/functions/graphql.ts` takes two props, `authDecoder` and `getCurrentUser`, for each of these steps (respectively):

```ts title="api/src/functions/graphql.ts"
// highlight-next-line
import { authDecoder } from '@redwoodjs/auth-auth0-api'
import { createGraphQLHandler } from '@redwoodjs/graphql-server'

import directives from 'src/directives/**/*.{js,ts}'
import sdls from 'src/graphql/**/*.sdl.{js,ts}'
import services from 'src/services/**/*.{js,ts}'

// highlight-next-line
import { getCurrentUser } from 'src/lib/auth'
import { db } from 'src/lib/db'
import { logger } from 'src/lib/logger'

export const handler = createGraphQLHandler({
  // highlight-start
  authDecoder,
  getCurrentUser,
  // highlight-end
  loggerConfig: { logger, options: {} },
  directives,
  sdls,
  services,
  onException: () => {
    // Disconnect from your database with an unhandled exception.
    db.$disconnect()
  },
})
```

### Destructuring the `useAuth` hook

The `useAuth` hook provides a streamlined interface to your auth provider's client SDK.

> Much of what the functions it returns does is self explanatory, but the options they take depend on the auth provider:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much of what the functions it returns do is self explanatory, but the options they take depend on the auth provider:
```

| `loading`         | If auth is loading                                                                                                                                                          |
| `logIn`           | Logs a user in                                                                                                                                                              |
| `logOut`          | Logs a user out                                                                                                                                                             |
| `reauthenticate`  | Refetch auth data and context                                                                                                                                               |
| `signUp`          | Signs a user up                                                                                                                                                             |
| `userMetadata`    | An object containing the user's metadata (or profile information) fetched directly from an instance of the auth provider client, or if the user isn't authenticated, `null` |

### Protecting routes

> You can require that a user be authenticated to navigate to a route by wrapping it in the `Private` component.

Reviewer: Maybe also mention `<Set private` here. I think that will make the example further down that uses Set less confusing :)

Author: See https://github.com/redwoodjs/redwood/pull/7229/commits/1df28b6263060100e4544f1ded52ea2fc8a9ac33
